Independent Submission                                            Task 2
Request for Comments: NNNN                            Tampere University
Category: Experimental                                         May, 2020


                  	     Uplink to Mars

Abstract

   This document describes the functionalities and requirements needed
   in order to establish the uplink communication system from Mars to
   Earth. Several procedures are suggested so the latency is reduced 
   when processing missing packages. The addresses that will be used and
   the submission for a domain are stated as basic specifications.

   Suggestions regarding the management of missing packages so that the
   latency is below 45 minutes are made, focusing on the situation where
   the Earth and Mars are furthest (when the Sun is the middle). The use
   of a relay station is suggested, specifying the location and logical
   functionality of such station, in order to proccess the missing 
   packets.

   On the application layer, TCP/IP is used for convenience, as it is
   widely used and the code is avaliable.
   
Task 2                          Experimental                    [Page 1]
 

RFC NNNN          	           Uplink to Mars         	       May, 2020

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction ....................................................3
      1.1. Motivation .................................................3
      1.2. Question statement .........................................3
   2.  Interplanetary communications ..................................4
   3.  Proposal .......................................................5
      3.1.  Basic specifications  .....................................5
        3.1.1  Network topology .......................................5
        3.1.2. IP Addresses ...........................................6
          3.1.2.1. Introduction .......................................6
          3.1.2.2. IPv6 addresses .....................................6
          3.1.2.3 SLAAC & DHCP for dynamic IPs ........................6
        3.1.3.  Top-level domain ......................................7
      3.2.  Relay station .............................................8
        3.2.1.  Location ..............................................8
        3.2.2.  Functionality .........................................9
   4.  Conclusions ...................................................10
   5.  References ....................................................11
   6.  Feedback ......................................................11

Task 2                          Experimental                    [Page 2]
 

RFC NNNN          	           Uplink to Mars         	       May, 2020


1.  Introduction
 
   With the increasing need for communications in the last years, 
   the development of technology and communications is growing at a very
   high pace. The design and implementation of interplanetary 
   communications system is one of the key deployments that will done
   within the next years.

   In the following document, the problem between the communication link
   between Mars and Earth is addressed, focusing on the time when both
   planets are in conjunction phase (distance is furthest). The main
   purpose is the come up with a solution for packet loss due to the
   strong noise that the Sun is produced.

   The RFC document is divided in several section. Section 2
   describes several key points that need to be considered when 
   discussing the issue. Section 3 states and describes with detail
   the specifications such as the IP address that will be used and
   top-level domain. Finally, section 4 includes the conclusion and 
   bullet points of the experimental RFC proposed.





Task 2                          Experimental                    [Page 3]
 

RFC NNNN          	           Uplink to Mars         	       May, 2020

2.  Interplanetary communications

   To perform the analysis for a correct communication link between
   Mars and Earth, there are a few considerations that need to be 
   specified and considered.


   o  Interplanetary communications are carried by electromagnetic waves
	  with speed of propagation about 300,000 km/s.

   o  The distance between Mars and Earth varies depending on the orbit 
	  phase they are in. The minimum distance is 55 million km and the 
	  maximum is 378 million km.  

   o  The minimum propagation time that can be achieved between Mars and
      the Earth occurs when they are closest, and it is of around 3 
	  minutes.

   o  The maximum propagation time that can be achieved between Mars and
      the Earth occurs when they are furthest, around 30 min.

   o  An acceptable overall latency delay is of around 45 minutes, while
	  75 is totally unacceptable for human interaction.
      
      
      
Task 2                          Experimental                    [Page 4]
 

RFC NNNN          	           Uplink to Mars         	       May, 2020


3.  Proposal

   The proposed solution states a suggestion to be used in order to 
   reduce the overall delay latency due to retransmission when a packet 
   is lost when it is router around the Sun. The main problem is that 
   the Sun produces strong noise which damages the packets. This 
   situation takes place when Mars and Earth are in conjunction phase 
   (the Sun is the middle and distance is furthest), the distance 
   between them is of 378 million km and the propagation time is of 
   around 30 minutes.

   If a packet is lost and needs to be retransmitted, the overall delay 
   will be around 75 minutes in this situation. Also, if the 
   communication link is performed directly by the hosts traveling on 
   the natural orbits around the Sun, it is not going to be possible to 
   communicate continuously for a time, and there will be a massive 
   number of packets lost.

   The proposed solution is to reduce the number of packets lost due to 
   the distance between Mars and Earth. If the packets are not lost 
   because of the conjunction phase and the noise produced by the Sun,
   the overall latency will be below 45 minutes, as the propagation time
   in this situation between Mars and Earth does not exceed 30 minutes.
   To let the packets be correctly transmitted in this situation, in the
   present document the use of relay stations is proposed.

3.1.  Basic specifications

   In the following section the basic specifications of the 
   communication link between the Earth and Mars are described. In 
   order to establish the link, it is needed to assign the addresses
   a top-level domain.


Task 2                          Experimental                    [Page 5]
 

RFC NNNN          	           Uplink to Mars         	       May, 2020


3.1.1. IP Addresses

3.1.1.1. Introduction
    
   To connect to the Earth`s Internet network, hosts in Mars
   need IP addresses to be able to use TCP/IP as host in Earth do 
   almost every time when using Internet connexion.
  
   IPv4 have already runned out in Earth and IPv6 is being deployed 
   slowly due to introduce IPv6 to completely substitute IPv4 would be 
   very costly regarding both hardware and software and because there 
   are techniques, like Ipv6 transition tunnelling that allow both 
   versions to coexist. In our case, as we are going to develop the 
   network from scratch, we have decided to use IPv6 from the 
   beginning.  

   This IPs could be assigned manually if desired, but this is a very 
   tedious work that makes no sense when designing a network topology 
   continuously changing and growing. As said before, assign static 
   IPs is always a choice and in some cases is even better for specific
   needs, but an automatic procedure is required to simplify and 
   automate the configuration of the internet access and make life 
   easier to every client of the network who desired it.

3.1.1.2. IPv6 addresses

   In the earth, only three /3 IPv6 addresses blocks are used and 
   that’s enough to cover all the needs by the moment, so we have 
   decided to start using only one /3 block to cover all Mars 
   considering to extend the range if needed.

   As in the Earth, a Regional Internet Registry (RIR) would be created 
   to manage the IPv6 addresses allocated to Mars and distribute them 
   between the different Internet Service Providers (ISP) whose task 
   would be to assign these IPs to the clients in Mars in a reasonable 
   manner. Besides, as in IPv4, in order to save addresses and hide private
   networks, Network Address Translation (NAT) is going to be 
   implemented to map theses public addresses into several private ones.

3.1.1.3. SLAAC & DHCP for dynamic IPs

   For the dynamic assignment of IPs presented before, IPv6 offers two
   kinds of address autoconfiguration. 
   
   On the one hand, stateful autoconfiguration technique is accomplished 
   using the well-known Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6
   (DHCPv6) specified in the RFC 8415 [1] . This protocol, the evolution of 
   DHCP used in IPv4, uses DHCP servers that assigns dynamically IPv6 
   addresses and other configuration information needed to stablish a 
   connection to the rest of IP networks.
   
   On the second hand, a new approach, Stateless Address 
   Autoconfiguration (SLAAC), defined in the RFC 7217 [2] has being 
   developed allowing IPv6 hosts to automatically generate IP 
   addresses internally without communicate with any other node in the
   network and in a secure way. This method is very useful and simple, but other
   information may be required, like DNS servers or IPv6 prefixes. In 
   order to get this info, hosts can use DHCP together with SLAAC or 
   another stateless autoconfiguration protocol, Neighbour Discovery 
   Protocol (ND) [3], used to get information required for internet
   communication like DNS or default gateways.

 

Task 2                          Experimental                    [Page 6]
 

RFC NNNN          	           Uplink to Mars         	       May, 2020



3.1.2  Top-level domain

   According to RFC 920 [7]: Domain Requirements, in order to establish a 
   the following information must be provided to the NIC Domain Register
   (HOSTMASTER@SRI-NIC.ARPA):

   1)  The name of the top-level domain to join.

      Name of the domain: COM

   2)  The name, title, mailing address, phone number, and organization
   of the administrative head of the organization.

      Administrator

            Organization Tampere University
            Name          Maria
            Title         Executive Director
            Mail Address Tampere University (Hervanta Campus)
                          Korkeakoulunkatu 7 Kampusareena
                          Tampere, FI. 33720
            Phone Number  555-555-555

   3)  The name, title, mailing address, phone number, and organization
   of the domain technical contact.

      Administrator

            Organization  Tampere University
            Name          Jose
            Title         Researcher
            Mail Address  Tampere University (Hervanta Campus)
                          Korkeakoulunkatu 7 Kampusareena
                          Tampere, FI. 33720
            Phone Number  555-555-555
            
   4)  The name, title, mailing address, phone number, and organization
   of the zone technical contact.

      Administrator

            Organization  Tampere University
            Name          Jose
            Title         Researcher
            Mail Address  Tampere University (Hervanta Campus)
                          Korkeakoulunkatu 7 Kampusareena
                          Tampere, FI. 33720
            Phone Number  555-555-555

   5)  The name of the domain (up to 12 characters).

      Name of the domain: MARS


   6)  A description of the servers that provides the domain service for
   translating name to address for hosts in this domain, and the date
   they will be operational.

      Our server meets the requierements of the current standards, and
      provides communications from the Earth to Mars, and will be 
      installed and operational on 1-January 2022.

   7)  A description of the server machines:

         (a) hardware and software

            HPE ProLiant DL20 Gen9  and  UNIX

         (b) address

            (Lo q diga Jero)

   8)  An estimate of the number of hosts that will be in the domain.


         (a) initially  =  500
         (b) one year   =  1000
         (c) two years  =  5000
         (d) five years =  10000


Task 2                          Experimental                    [Page 7]
 

RFC NNNN          	           Uplink to Mars         	       May, 2020
------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.  Relay station

   In the following section, the specifications regarding the relay
   station that will be used to route the signal around the
   Sun are described. The purpose of using such station is that the 
   noise produced in this area will interfere and jam the signal, so 
   its use is suggested for cleaning purposes. The proposal includes
   two spacecrafts acting as relay stations.


3.2.1.  Location

   When any type of satellite or station is placed onto the space, it
   will follow the natural orbit around the Sun (also referred as orbit
   A) called the Keplerian orbits. If the relay station is placed on the
   Keplerian orbits, the communications will be blocked by the Sun at 
   some points, which will lead to noncontinuous communications between
   the Earth and Mars.

   According to the paper "Non-Keplerian Orbits Using Low Thrust,
   High ISP Propulsion Systems" [4] there is a way
   to overcome this problem, by placing two satellites on the B orbits
   (also called non-Keplerian orbits), which are artificialy displaced 
   orbits. It has been shown that if you can provide continuous thrust, 
   it is possible to place two different satellites that would work as 
   the relay stations and provide continuous communications between the 
   Earth and Mars. There is need to place two relay stations because 
   that way it is ensured that that at least one of them would always be
   in view of both planets.

   The process of thrusting is a high-consumption task for the 
   spacecraft, so, the idea is to place the satellites on the B orbits 
   while the conjunction phase and once it is over,they will go back to 
   the Keplerian orbits to save fuel.
   
Task 2                          Experimental                    [Page 8]
 

RFC NNNN          	           Uplink to Mars         	       May, 2020


3.2.2.  Functionality

   Once we have deal with the problem of the link blocked by the sun
   in the conjunction scenario we must deal with the problem packet 
   delivery in a reasonable time that allows colonists to communicate 
   with hosts back on Earth. These relays will have two different radio 
   links, a link to the surface of Mars and a link to a satellite 
   network orbiting Earth that will provide connection to the Earths 
   surface. Obviously, the main problem is not in the links from the 
   satellites to the surface of the planet, the big deal is to find a 
   reliable and fast way to transmit the packets through the link 
   between Mars and Earth's satellites to provide QoS to  
   the users in both planets. 
   
   As spotted before, both Mars and Earth networks need to use TCP/IP in 
   order to be consistent with the protocols and to avoid write another 
   software from scratch. The problem of TCP is that need to acknowledge 
   all the packets and in the case of failure, retransmission should be 
   done, increasing the latency to twice the transmission time plus the 
   expected time needed to receive the ack, transmission time again. We 
   know in advance that transmission time from Earth to Mars goes from 3 
   to 30 min and in this scenario, retransmissions are not a choice
   because we overcome the 45 min requested as maximum delay. 
   
   As we want to avoid retransmissions in the interplanetary link, we 
   must avoid the packets to be damaged and those no retransmissions 
   are needed. Although we have solved the problem for packet damage 
   when the sun is in between both planets by using the relays, 
   packets can still be lost for other reasons like congestion or 
   interfaces.

   This leads us to our solution to the retransmission problem, that 
   involves the concepts of Store and Forward [5] and Forward Error 
   Correction (FEC) [6]. 
   
   Store and Forward is based on the idea of storing the 
   incoming packets until the link is available and free of 
   interferences. In this way, packets will never be lost due to a 
   continuous update of the link state will be done to let both
   ends of the links know when transmission can be done. To actualize
   and keep track of the link state, a signalling protocol is going to 
   be deployed to enhance the performance of the TCP/IP. Besides, the
   use of retransmissions is going to be limited to only one hop, so the 
   link is splitted in small links that correct the errors and do the
   retransmissions independently avoiding retransmitting the message from 
   the beginning with the help of the Store and Forward.
   
   Forward Error Correction (FEC) is a technique used to control and 
   correct errors in the receiver side of an unreliable or noisy 
   communication channels avoiding the use of retransmissions. 
   This is done by encoding the message in a redundant way. The 
   redundancy allows to notice error in the message and sometimes, 
   correct those without the need of retransmissions. The only problem is
   that you need more bandwidth, but in and interplanetary link this
   is not a problem. 
   
   This signalling system is very simple. It only consists of some 
   periodical signals sent each 30 seconds from both ends in order 
   to let the other end of the link whether the link has some problem 
   or not in an approximated way. These signals are known by both ends 
   and those they can see how the signal has been modified by the link 
   and in this way estimate if the link can introduce a high amount of
   errors or if it is more or less safe to transmit the data traffic
   previously stored.

   In addition, some other solutions would be useful to reduce the 
   congestion situation and in this way to reduce the packet lost and 
   decrease the waiting. The first one would be obviously copying all 
   the internet information and store it in new servers in mars so most
   of the data is already stored in Mars and those only live data should
   be transmitted over the interplanetary link. Secondly, due to the 
   long distances data is exposed to very high jitter and those it may 
   not arrive at the same time. To deal with it, de-jittered buﬀer could 
   be used in order the receiver to be able to get all the data in 
   one piece.


   


Task 2                          Experimental                    [Page 9]
 

RFC NNNN          	           Uplink to Mars         	       May, 2020



4.  Conclusions

	The task to create an interplanetary internet between Earth and Mars 
	is not a choice with the technology we have nowadays due to the
	huge latencies and delays that the large distances and diverse 
	mediums introduce. However, the solution we propose bring us a step 
	closer to the dream of having real time communications between Mars
	and Earth. Our solution uses TCP/IP as mentioned before, but other
	protocols designed specifically for spatial communications are 
	being deployed nowadays and therefore, the most obvious solution
	is not to keep using the same protocols than in the earth but 
	make these old protocols compatible with the new ones so they can 
	coexist to reach the best approach to this communications problem.



Task 2                          Experimental                   [Page 10]
 

RFC NNNN          	           Uplink to Mars         	       May, 2020

5. Informative References
	
   [1]	RFC 8415 (ttps://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8415)
   [2]  RFC 7217 (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7217)
   [3]  RFC 4861 (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4861)
   [4]   McKay, Robert, et al. "Non-Keplerian orbits using low thrust, 
         high isp propulsion systems." 60th International Astronautical 
         Congress. 2009.
   [5]  Store and Forward (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Store_and_forward)
   [6]  Forward_error_correction (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forward_error_correction)	           
   [7]  RFC 920 (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc920)

6.  Feedback 
	
	We are not going to take in account feedbacks 1,3 & 7 due to they didn't
	put any effort in the correction process or explaining they advices and they 
    do not provide any valuable information to improve the report.
	
	On the other hand, I really appreciate the second feedback, its very 
	useful due to the new ideas and small errors it mentions.
